hello maths fans this is dr tom crawford
from the university of oxford
and today we're talking about partial
differentiation
partial differentiation is what happens
when you differentiate a
function of more than one variable
so if we start by considering the
standard
derivative so if i want to know
df by dx
for a function f of x
then this is equal to the limit
as h tends to zero
of f at x plus h
minus f at x
divided by h
if we were to look at the graph of this
function which maybe
would be something like the following so
f of x and then x
perhaps it would look something like
this then what we're doing here
is we are taking a point
here let's call this x another point
at x plus h
and what we're doing is we're
approximating
this gradient and we're taking the limit
as we allow this point to move closer
and closer
to x so we're working out
how does our function f change
in the x direction because f is just a
line
what this means is that f can only
change
in the x direction so as we move along
the x-axis
we're interested in how does the value
of f or the value on the y-axis
change so the only real derivative we
can do here
is the f by dx because that is the only
direction in which
f is changing now if we have a function
of
several variables and let's just start
with
two for example we have f
of x and y so now f depends on both x
and y
and so what this is actually going to
give you is a surface
so if you were to plot z is equal to
some function of x and y
you get a three dimensional surface
which will change in both the x
direction and
the y direction so if we consider the
example
z equals x y
squared plus y
x cubed so when we plug this into our
maple calculator app
we are given the three surface
plot of this function and we can see
that it is indeed a
surface it's changing in both the
x and the y directions simultaneously
and so therefore it now makes sense
that you might want to know how the
function is changing
in more than one direction as an example
from this particular viewpoint we can
see
that as we move along the x-axis the
function is decreasing
so in this direction in the x-direction
our function is decreasing but if we
rotate the image
we can now see that along the y-axis so
in the y-direction
our function is increasing so our
function
is behaving differently it is changing
in a different way depending on
the direction in which we are
investigating
and so what partial derivatives really
do
is allow us to calculate the rate of
change
for a given direction so the x
partial derivative tells us how does our
function f of x y how does that
change specifically moving in the x
direction
and then the y partial derivative will
tell us how our function
changes if we only move in the y
direction so mathematically our
definitions are going to be
as follows if i want to know
the partial x derivative
of f where f is a function of x and
y first of all we use this curly d
notation and this just says that this is
a partial
derivative compared to the standard or
full
derivative in this situation and we
define this
to be the limit as h
tends to zero so unchanged so far
of f of x
plus h comma
y minus f
of x y all divided by
h so you'll notice it's very similar
in fact almost identical to our full
or standard derivative df by dx
but in the partial case what we're doing
is we're adding our h our small
increment this is added only to the
x coordinate of our function
y remains unchanged
so this is telling us that the
y-coordinate doesn't
change the value of y remains
constant and we're just looking at what
happens
if we change the x value
only the partial y derivative is of
course very similar
so here we're interested in how f
changes
in the y direction so we take the same
limit as h goes to zero
but now we leave x unchanged so it's
f of x and now we add h
to the y value then we subtract
f x y and then we divide
by h so very similar to the partial
x except now we do the plus h
on the y coordinate
because we're interested in how the
function changes
when we change y and only
change y so the x coordinate here
remains constant
and we are purely moving a small amount
in the y direction and then taking the
limit
to calculate the y partial derivative
now that we know the formal mathematical
definitions
of our partial x and y derivatives
let's actually work through an example
of the function we looked at earlier
f of x y is x y squared plus y
x cubed so let's compute the partial
derivatives
to see how this works in practice
and the key thing here is to remember
that when you're doing your
x partial derivative y
doesn't change so that means you can
basically treat
y as a constant and similarly when you
do your y
partial derivative x isn't changing
so therefore you treat x as a constant
so if f of x y is x y squared plus y
x cubed if we calculate first
df by dx
so our usual rules of differentiation
apply
we still differentiate any function of x
as though it is a full or standard
derivative
however remember y
is constant in our x partial so these y
terms
just treat them like any other constant
they are just
a number that we just ignore pretty much
so what i mean by that is if i do df by
dx
this first term x times y squared
when y is constant this is just constant
times x so when i differentiate
a constant function times x i just get
the constant
so the derivative on x behaves as normal
the derivative of x is just one and then
i'm still multiplying by
my constant which here just happens to
be y
squared the next term the y
is again constant so i just
keep that and then what's going to
happen is
i differentiate x cubed exactly as i
would
normally so i bring the 3 down bring the
power down reduce the power by 1
x squared so the x partial derivative
is just y squared because this is linear
in x
y is constant plus the
cube's term becomes a squared bring the
three down and again just leave the y
there because it's a constant now the y
derivative is very similar
but this time we just treat x
as a constant so the x is constant
i've got a y squared so if i
differentiate y
squared i get 2y so overall
the x remains where it is i get 2xy
and then the next term so x again is
constant this is just constant
times y so a linear function in y
just gives me the constant which here
would just be x
cubed and that's pretty much
it this would be our partial x
derivative
and this is our partial y derivative now
we can go a little bit further
we can calculate the second order
derivatives
so d2f by dx
squared and so that just means
take this derivative here df by dx
and differentiate again with respect to
x where we remember y
doesn't change so y is a constant
so this one the first term is a constant
differentiates to give zero
and then if i do my x derivative on x
squared the 2 comes down so i get
6 y x
so that is my second x partial
derivative
of the function f we can also calculate
our second y derivative
in the same way so d to f
by d y squared
so that is going to be the y derivative
of d f by d y remembering that
x is a constant here so this x
cubed term goes to zero because it's
just the derivative of a constant
and here again x is the constant we
differentiate the linear function of y
so we're just going to get 2 x
and we could carry on we can calculate
higher and higher
derivatives we can even mix the
derivatives
so we could do d2f by dxdy
or even d2f by dy dx
where you're changing the order so one
of the means do x derivative first then
the y derivative
and the other one would mean y
derivative first then x
derivative and i do recommend trying
this out for yourself
to get practice with doing partial
derivatives
of higher orders maybe with mixed
so just pick any function f of x
y you can plug it into the maple
calculator app
and it will automatically tell you the
x and y partial derivatives of the
function
once you enter it into the app so you
should do it yourself
first and then you can use the app to
check your answer
and sort of mark your own work and see
if you're beginning to grasp
how partial differentiation works all of
the other rules about differentiation
that you may have learned
for example the product rule the
quotient rule the chain rule
these all still apply when doing partial
derivatives so i've got another example
here which is a little bit more
complicated
but we'll go through the first partial
derivatives to give you a feel
for how the product quotient and chain
rules work
in this context so f of x y
is going to be x squared plus 2x all
multiplied by
sine of x squared plus y plus
e to the y minus 2x
so first of all let's calculate our x
partial derivative df by dx
we remember that y doesn't change
y is now a constant so
this is just now a constant as is the y
in the exponential
now i still need to do the x derivative
using product rule and also a chain rule
as well so the first term
let's do a product rule so let's
differentiate the first bracket
with respect to x so that's 2x
plus 2 then i have
the second term which is unchanged
now i want to differentiate the second
term
and leave the first term unchanged as i
would for any normal product
so that will give me plus x
squared plus 2x
multiplied by the x derivative
of sine of x squared plus y
so we're going to have to do a chain
rule as well so we
differentiate sine which gives us
cos of x squared
plus y
now having differentiated the sign
we get cos but then the chain rule says
i have to multiply by the
x derivative of the argument
of sine so i've got x squared plus
y y is a constant in this situation
because i'm doing an
x partial so x squared plus constant
if i differentiate that with respect to
x
i just get 2 x
and that will be the product rule done
on that first
term now we also have to differentiate
the exponential
so what i'm going to get here is the
exponential is unchanged
so e to the y minus 2x
and then from the chain rule i have to
differentiate the argument
so i need to do the x partial derivative
of y minus 2 x y is a constant
so that disappears and we just get minus
from the chain rule finally if we now do
the partial y
derivative in much the same way this one
is actually a lot easier because
we remember that when we're doing a y
partial derivative
we've got over here that x
isn't changing x is constant
so this whole term x squared plus 2x
is just a big old constant so that just
stays where it is
and now what we actually differentiate
is the sine
term because that has a y dependency
so the derivative of sine gives me cos
of its argument and then the chain rule
tells me
to differentiate the argument
but when we're doing this with respect
to
y x is a constant so the y
partial of x squared plus y it's just
one so you don't actually get
an additional factor and you're going to
get the same thing
with the exponential in fact because the
derivative of the exponential
gives you back the same exponential
multiplied by
the y partial of the argument
but again x is a constant so that just
disappears
and we just get back the derivative of y
which is 1.
so this x squared plus 2x
times cos of x squared plus y plus e to
the y minus 2x
that is our much simpler y partial
compared to the slightly more
complicated
x partial derivative if you want some
more practice with partial
differentiation
i've actually set up a worksheet in
maple learn
which you can access completely for free
by clicking the link
on screen so there's plenty of questions
for you to have a go at
plenty of partial derivatives for you to
calculate
and remember you can always check your
answers by
entering the function in the maple
calculator app
as this will automatically calculate
those partial derivatives
for you thank you everyone for watching
please do remember to subscribe to my
channel
if you've enjoyed this video and i'll be
back soon with some more maths fun
you